---
title: "MAT 3100W: HW06"
date: 2025-10-16
blog: MAT3100WF25
layout: layouts/mat3100WF25post.njk
---

## Required Exercises.
*Do all 10 points of the following required exercises.*

### Required Exercise 1 [4]
Start a timer for 24 minutes. Go to the index of the textbook to review something we discussed in class or read about something new.

When you're done, write a sentence or two in the `#hw-prompts` channel about something interesting you read, a question you have, or something you're curious about.

### Required Exercise 2 [3]
Let $F_1 = F_2 = 1$, and $F_n = F_{n-1} + F_{n-2}$ for $n \geq 3$. Use induction to prove that $F_n$ is even if and only if $3 \mid n$.

### Required Exercise 3 [3]
*In this part, you're going to continue building your proofs portfolio.*
1. Go to the [proofs portfolio instructions](/F25/MAT3100W/proofs_portfolio/), set a timer for 5 minutes, and read the document until you finish or the timer goes off, and write any questions you have here.
2. Add the relevant `\section{...}` headers to your document.
3. Take the problem you had your classmates give you feedback on last week, implement their feedback, and make a note here about what feedback you made.<br>At the top of this <code>.tex</code> file, check that you have <code>\usepackage{pdfpages}</code>. At the bottom, on the second-to-last line (right before <code>\end{document}</code>) add <code>\includepdf[pages=-]{portfolio.pdf}</code>. When you compile, your portfolio should be at the end of your <code>HW05.pdf</code> document. (When you tag this exercise on Gradescope, make sure to include parts 1 and 2 along with this writeup.)
4. Choose another proof technique or mathematical idea (different from the part above) that has stood out to you this term, add the relevant `\subsection{}`, and give a proposition/proof of the proof or a definition/example/proof of the idea.

## Choice Exercises.
*Do 10 points worth of the following choice exercises. Make sure to tag the appropriate problems when you submit on Gradescope.*

### Choice Exercise 4 [1 + 2 + 3]
*Do any of the following problems, meant to check your comprehension about ideas from class this week.*
<ol>
  <li>[1] Many student find it confusing that both  "if (false) then (true)" and "if (false) then (false)" are true statements. I'm going to tell a story of how it makes sense to me, and in your writeup, write a story of how you make sense of it.<br>
  Suppose I say, "If it's a Tuesday, then I work from home," there's four things that could happen.
  <ul>
    <li>It's a Tuesday and I work from home. (What I said is true, because I said "if true then true".)</li>
    <li>It's a Tuesday and I go to campus. (What I said is false, because I said "if true then false".)</li>
    <li>It's not a Tuesday and I work from home. (What I said is true, because I said "if false then true".)</li>
    <li>It's not a Tuesday and I go to campus. (What I said is true, because I said "if false then false".)</li>
  </ul>
</li>
  <li>[2] Do the following:</li>
  <ul>
    <li>Write the definition of a <i>statement</i>, which we write $P$.</li>
    <li>Write the definition of an <i>open sentence</i> which we write $P(x)$.</li>
    <li>Write a statement of the form "If $P$, then $Q$" where $P$ and $Q$ are statements.</li>
    <li>Write a statement of the form "If $P(x)$, then $Q(x)$" where $P(x)$ and $Q(x)$ are open sentences.</li>
    <li>Take one of your two "if-then" statements above, and write its inverse, converse, and contrapositive.</li>
  </ul>
  <li>[3] Do the following:</li>
  <ul>
    <li>Prove the following: for all odd integers $n$, there exists an odd integer $m$ such that $n < m < n+3$</li>
    <li>The following statement is false: for all odd integers $k$, there exists an odd integer $\ell$ (written <code>\ell</code>) such that $k < \ell < k+2$. Say informally why the statement is false.</li>
    <li>Rewrite $k < \ell < k+2$ as a statement that includes the word "and".</li>
    <li>Use De Morgan's (logic) laws to write the negation of $k < \ell < k+2$ as a statement that includes the word "or".</li>
    <li>Write the negation of the statement "for all odd integers $k$, there exists an odd integer $\ell$ (written <code>\ell</code>) such that $k < \ell < k+2$" in such a way that it begins with "there exists", contains a "for all" statement in the middle, and ends with an "or" statement.</li>
  </ul>
</ol>

### Choice Exercise 5 [3].
This problem will walk you through the negation of the statement "For all $x \in X$ there exists $y \in Y$ such that for all $z \in Z$, $P(x,y,z)$."

1. First, we're ultimately trying to simplify
> $\sim\\!($For all $x \in X$ there exists $y \in Y$ such that for all $z \in Z$, $P(x,y,z)).$

Which quantifier negation rule are we using when we say the above is equivalent to the following?
> There exists $x \in X$ such that $\sim\\!($there exists $y \in Y$ such that for all $z \in Z$, $P(x,y,z)).$

2. Now use the other negation rule to move the NOT further into the expression.

3. Now rewrite even further, so the statement ends with $\sim P(x,y,z).$

### Choice Exercise 6 [1 + 3]
In class, we claimed that for all pairs of real numbers $x, y \in \mathbb R$ with $x < y$, there exists a rational number $r \in \mathbb{Q}$ such that $x < r < y$.

1. [1] Suppose $x = \pi \approx 3.14159265$ and $y = 22/7 \approx 3.142857$. Find a rational number $r$ such that $\pi < r < 22/7$.
2. [3] Prove that for all integers $d > 1/(y-x)$, there exists an integer $n$ such that $x < n/d < y$. (In the above case, $d \geq 791$ and if $d = 791$, then $n = 2485$.)

### Choice Exercise 7 [4]
One of the classic "decision problems" in computer science is called [SAT, which is short for satisfiability](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boolean_satisfiability_problem). In these problems, you are given an expression with many boolean variables, $b_1, b_2, \dots, b_n$, and many clauses, like the following:
$$(b_1 \lor b_2 \lor \sim b_3) \land (\sim b_1 \lor b_3 \lor b_4) \land \dots$$

These expressions are called "SAT instances" and the format used in this problem is a sub-type called "3-SAT." Your goal is to find an assignment of true/false for each of the variables to make the entire statement true. If you can find an efficient (polynomial-time) algorithm to solve these problems, [you can claim a prize of $1000000](https://www.claymath.org/millennium/p-vs-np/) (and also decrypt my bank password 😔) If you can prove no such algorithm exists, you can also claim the $1000000, and my bank password is safe! 😀

Here's a 3-SAT instance written in Python. Write some code that will find all possible boolean assignments of `x1`, `x2`, ..., `x12` that make the entire statement true (all 1406 characters of it). Include your code, the solutions, and the number of solutions in your writeup.

```python
(not(x11) or not(x3) or not(x1)) and (x6 or not(x10) or not(x6)) and (x2 or x8 or x5) and (not(x4) or not(x5) or not(x12)) and (x2 or not(x3) or x8) and (x2 or x1 or x9) and (not(x6) or x10 or not(x12)) and (x5 or not(x6) or x10) and (x1 or x5 or x2) and (not(x4) or not(x10) or x8) and (x7 or x8 or not(x10)) and (not(x10) or x6 or not(x9)) and (x5 or not(x7) or x9) and (x1 or x2 or x9) and (not(x1) or x5 or not(x11)) and (x6 or x8 or x2) and (x3 or not(x9) or x5) and (x1 or x3 or not(x4)) and (not(x5) or x5 or x5) and (x5 or x12 or not(x7)) and (not(x5) or not(x8) or x3) and (x8 or x6 or x4) and (x2 or not(x12) or x12) and (not(x5) or not(x2) or x6) and (not(x7) or not(x2) or not(x7)) and (not(x2) or x2 or x5) and (x7 or not(x3) or x8) and (not(x11) or x2 or not(x10)) and (not(x1) or not(x8) or not(x12)) and (x11 or x5 or x1) and (not(x7) or x8 or x12) and (x5 or x9 or not(x12)) and (x3 or x7 or x10) and (x7 or x2 or x3) and (x6 or not(x2) or x11) and (x2 or not(x7) or not(x10)) and (x10 or not(x12) or not(x4)) and (x12 or x2 or not(x6)) and (x1 or not(x4) or x6) and (x1 or x3 or not(x11)) and (not(x4) or x10 or x4) and (x3 or x8 or not(x4)) and (not(x5) or x10 or x3) and (x6 or x9 or not(x8)) and (not(x7) or not(x1) or not(x7)) and (x1 or not(x12) or not(x7)) and (not(x2) or x2 or not(x5)) and (not(x11) or x7 or not(x11)) and (not(x5) or x6 or not(x7)) and (not(x5) or x3 or not(x7))
```

<!-- SAT Solver!!
Programming problem.
Induction is recursion?
Or bitwise operators? -->

### Choice Exercise 8 [≤8]
One of the key (difficult!) ideas in an analysis class is the epsilon-delta proof. We define a limit as $\displaystyle \lim_{x \to a} f(x) = L$ if
for all real numbers $\varepsilon > 0$, there exists $\delta \in \mathbb{R}$  such that for all $x$ such that $|x - a| < \delta$, $|f(x) - f(a)| < \varepsilon$.

1. [1] Write the negation of the statement "for all real numbers $\varepsilon > 0$, there exists $\delta \in \mathbb{R}$  such that for all $x$ such that $|x - a| < \delta$, $|f(x) - f(a)| < \varepsilon$."
2. [3] Show that "for all real numbers $\varepsilon > 0$, there exists $\delta \in \mathbb{R}$  such that for all $x$ such that $|x - a| < \delta$, $|f(x) - f(a)| \geq \varepsilon$" is *not* the negation of this statement.
3. [4] We want to prove something that we know: the function $f(x) = 2x + 1$ is continuous. Let $f(x) = 2x + 1$ and prove that $\displaystyle \lim_{x \to a} f(x) = f(a)$ for all $a \in \mathbb{R}$.

### Choice Exercise 9 [3]
Here's a YouTube video (27:31) that introduces you to logic. If you're feeling good about the concepts in the class, skip it! If you could use more practice/review, take a watch. When you're done, write a few sentences about what you understood and what you still found confusing.

Note, we always use *words* in our mathematical writeups, so you should never turn something in that looks like this: $$\forall x \in \mathbb{R}(x \neq 0 \Rightarrow \exists y \in \mathbb{R}, xy = 1).$$

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/JVjv0CCzHok?si=Wg3Psf3eZCIGju6i" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>

### Choice Exercise 10 [3]
In class, I showed you my work from college where I proved the proposition:

> Given positive integers $n$ and $m$, if $m \mid n$ then $(2^m-1)\mid(2^n-1)$.

Here is my revised version of the writeup.
```tex
\begin{proof}
  Since $m \mid n$, we can write $n = mk$, and so $2^{n}=2^{mk}$. Thus we can write \begin{align*}
    2^{mk}-1 &= 2^{m(k-1)}2^m - 1 \\
    &= 2^{m(k-1)}(2^{m}-1)+2^{m(k-1)}-1 \\
    &= 2^{m(k-1)}(2^{m}-1)+2^{m(k-2)}(2^{m}-1)+2^{m(k-2)}-1.
  \end{align*}

  By this pattern, it can be seen that \[
    2^n-1=(2^m-1)\left(\sum_{i=1}^{k}2^{m(k-i)}\right).
  \]
  Therefore, since the sum of integers is an integer, $(2^{m}-1)\mid(2^{n}-1)$ for all $m, n \in \mathbb{N}$ such that $m \mid n$.
\end{proof}
```
1. As I mentioned in class, my phrase "by this pattern, it can be seen that" is doing a lot of work (too much!)<br>Copy/paste my proof, but remove the phrase "by this pattern, it can be seen that," and write it up properly, using an induction argument or another rigorous argument.
2. If you change the "if" to an "if and only if" in the proposition, is the result still true?

### Choice Exercise 11 [≤10 pts]
*Do any subset of the following parts, state which you did and how many points you are claiming for this problem*

1. **[≤3]** Email Prof Kagey (pkagey@cpp.edu) or post in the <code>#feedback</code> channel on Discord with a typo that you have spotted in this assignment or with a suggestion about how to make something clearer. (One point for every six minutes that the typo got you stuck, with a maximum of three points.)
1. **[≤2]** Ask a question on Discord. (One point per question, up to 2.)
1. **[≤4]** Answer a classmate’s question on Discord or give a hint about a problem on this week's assignment.[^0] (Two points per answer/hint, up to 4.)
1. **[≤4]** Can you generalize any of the above problems in an interesting way? If so say what the generalization is, attempt to solve it, say something about it, and say how many points you feel like your effort was worth, up to 4.
1. **[≤4]** Choose one or more problems from our textbook or a previous homework assignment which interest you and write the problem statement along with an answer. Say how many points you feel like your effort was worth, up to 4.
1. **[2]** Stop by student drop-in hours.
1. **[2 or 5]** Work on at least one of the above exercises with a classmate. State which classmate you worked with and which exercises you collaborated on. If you've collaborated with someone for the first time, you get 5 points, if you've collaborated with someone before, you get 2 points for working with them again.
1. **[2]** Turn in the assignment on time (without requesting an extension).

[^0]: The syntax for a hint on Discord is double bars `||` on each side of the spoiler like this: `Remember that ||1 + x < x + 2||.`
